---
title: 'Propaganda and Brain Function: Using Technology to Measure Impact'
intro_image: /assets/img/PapePresentation.CRCL.jpg
add_overlay: false
add_disqus: false
add_dropcap: true
tags:
  - terrorism
  - research
  - recruitment
  - propaganda
id: 501138f3-4b9d-4e39-812c-8a5447ad9019
authors:
  - tvpp
---
University of Chicago researchers are using technology to better understand how the
propaganda in martyr videos of the so-called Islamic State impacts viewer brain function.
Dr. Robert Pape, Director of the UC Chicago Project on Security and Threats, and his
team are using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) technology to review and
analyze brain scans of individuals as they view a curated set of martyr videos. They hope
to gain a scientific understanding of how these videos may influence individual choices.

Dr. Pape discussed research June 6 at the quarterly Civil Rights and Civil Liberties
Roundtable, hosted by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in Chicago. The
roundtable brings together a cross-section of civil society and representatives from
federal, state, and local government in and around the Chicago area. He described the
“social logic of martyrdom” used by the 9/11 hijackers and contrasted it with the “new
logic of martyrdom” used by ISIS. He said ISIS videos seem to follow a Hollywood
template of the heroic narrative.

Dr. Pape is recruiting 120 individuals from a wide range of backgrounds and a diversity
of religions for study participation. But while many have volunteered to take part in the
project, the Muslim community is so far underrepresented. An inadequate number of
Muslim participants will leave a noticeable hole in the research, he said.

Mr. Kareem Shora, U.S. Department of Homeland Security Office for Civil Rights and
Civil Liberties Section Chief for Community Engagement, opened the discussion with an
overview of DHS’ view of ideologically inspired targeted violence. The department
focuses on all forms of ideologically inspired targeted violence stemming from groups
that range from white supremacy and sovereign citizens to ISIS and Al Qaeda.

“Ideologically inspired violence could be theological, but it could also be social, racial,
political, or personal," said Mr. Shora. “Our view is that the more awareness we are able
to raise, the more likely we, as a society, are able to mitigate those factors that may cause
someone to act violently. Communities are not part of the problem but they are an
essential part of the solution.”