---
title: MN Mosque Bombers Indicted on Federal Civil Rights and Hate Crimes Charges
add_overlay: false
short_description: >
  Members of the "White Rabbit Three Percent Illinois Patriot Freedom Fighters Militia" based in
  Clarence, Illinois allegedly responsible for mosque bombing in Bloomington, Minnesota in August
  2017.
abstract: |
  Michael Hari, Michael McWhorter, and Joe Morris of Clarence, Illinois are being prosecuted by federal authorities in Minnesota and Illinois for two separate attacks. In Minnesota the three members of the "White Rabbit Three Percent Illinois Patriot Freedom Fighters Militia" allegedly bombed a mosque.  In Illinois these same three men allegedly bombed a women's clinic. No terrorism charges were brought against the defendants.
add_disqus: false
add_dropcap: false
id: 3d6e7399-a442-4f49-87f3-82000619be26
authors:
  - tvpp
tags:
  - hate-crimes
---
Michael Hari, Michael McWhorter, and Joe Morris are charged with federal civil rights and hate crimes charges in federal court in Minneapolis, MN for their alleged bombing of the Dar al-Farooq Islamic Center (DAF) in Bloomington, MN on August 5, 2017.

According to the indictment, Hari constructed a pipe bomb and rented a pickup truck in Champaign-Urbana, IL. Hari, McWhorter, and Morris drove from Illinois to Bloomington, MN with the pipe bomb in the rented pickup truck. Along the way the defendants stopped to purchase diesel fuel and gasoline. These ingredients were mixed together in a container. A window in the mosque was smashed by the defendants, and then the plastic container containing the mixture was thrown into the mosque through the smashed window. Next the defendants lit the fuse on the pipe bomb and threw it into the same room through the smashed window. There was an explosion and extensive damage was done to what turned out to be the imam's office. According to the indictment the defendants used the attack to scare Muslims out of the United States and send a message that Muslims are not welcome here.

In April 2018 [ABC Channel 7 Eyewitness News](http://abc7chicago.com/illinois-to-get-first-shot-at-accused-mosque-bombers/3339265/) reported that these three individuals belonged to a domestic terrorist group called "White Rabbit Militia." According to that same report Hari, a former Ford County sheriff's deputy, was the group's leader.

The defendants are also facing federal charges in Illinois on allegations that they attempted to blow up the Women's Health Practice in Champaign, IL.

According to the ABC report there are YouTube videos posted by some of the defendants on a channel titled "Illinois Patriot."  These videos are still available on [YouTube](https://youtu.be/EFgvd8cM5bI).

No terrorism charges are pending in either case.

Press Release from the United States Department of Justice ([here](https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/three-illinois-men-indicted-federal-civil-rights-and-hate-crimes-charges-bombing-bloomington))

